    _Mrs. Spring Fragrance_


                                   I

When Mrs. Spring Fragrance first arrived in Seattle, she was
unacquainted with even one word of the American language. Five years
later her husband, speaking of her, said: “There are no more American
words for her learning.” And everyone who knew Mrs. Spring Fragrance
agreed with Mr. Spring Fragrance.

Mr. Spring Fragrance, whose business name was Sing Yook, was a young
curio merchant. Though conservatively Chinese in many respects, he was
at the same time what is called by the Westerners, “Americanized.” Mrs.
Spring Fragrance was even more “Americanized.”

Next door to the Spring Fragrances lived the Chin Yuens. Mrs. Chin Yuen
was much older than Mrs. Spring Fragrance; but she had a daughter of
eighteen with whom Mrs. Spring Fragrance was on terms of great
friendship. The daughter was a pretty girl whose Chinese name was Mai
Gwi Far (a rose) and whose American name was Laura. Nearly everybody
called her Laura, even her parents and Chinese friends. Laura had a
sweetheart, a youth named Kai Tzu. Kai Tzu, who was American-born, and
as ruddy and stalwart as any young Westerner, was noted amongst baseball
players as one of the finest pitchers on the Coast. He could also sing,
“Drink to me only with thine eyes,” to Laura’s piano accompaniment.

Now the only person who knew that Kai Tzu loved Laura and that Laura
loved Kai Tzu, was Mrs. Spring Fragrance. The reason for this was that,
although the Chin Yuen parents lived in a house furnished in American
style, and wore American clothes, yet they religiously observed many
Chinese customs, and their ideals of life were the ideals of their
Chinese forefathers. Therefore, they had betrothed their daughter,
Laura, at the age of fifteen, to the eldest son of the Chinese
Government school-teacher in San Francisco. The time for the
consummation of the betrothal was approaching.

Laura was with Mrs. Spring Fragrance and Mrs. Spring Fragrance was
trying to cheer her.

“I had such a pretty walk today,” said she. “I crossed the banks above
the beach and came back by the long road. In the green grass the
daffodils were blowing, in the cottage gardens the currant bushes were
flowering, and in the air was the perfume of the wallflower. I wished,
Laura, that you were with me.”

Laura burst into tears. “That is the walk,” she sobbed, “Kai Tzu and I
so love; but never, ah, never, can we take it together again.”

“Now, Little Sister,” comforted Mrs. Spring Fragrance, “you really must
not grieve like that. Is there not a beautiful American poem written by
a noble American named Tennyson, which says:

                  “’Tis better to have loved and lost,
                  Than never to have loved at all?”

Mrs. Spring Fragrance was unaware that Mr. Spring Fragrance, having
returned from the city, tired with the day’s business, had thrown
himself down on the bamboo settee on the veranda, and that although his
eyes were engaged in scanning the pages of the _Chinese World_, his ears
could not help receiving the words which were borne to him through the
open window.

                  “’Tis better to have loved and lost,
                  Than never to have loved at all,”

repeated Mr. Spring Fragrance. Not wishing to hear more of the secret
talk of women, he arose and sauntered around the veranda to the other
side of the house. Two pigeons circled around his head. He felt in his
pocket for a li-chi which he usually carried for their pecking. His
fingers touched a little box. It contained a jadestone pendant, which
Mrs. Spring Fragrance had particularly admired the last time she was
down town. It was the fifth anniversary of Mr. and Mrs. Spring
Fragrance’s wedding day.

Mr. Spring Fragrance pressed the little box down into the depths of his
pocket.

A young man came out of the back door of the house at Mr. Spring
Fragrance’s left. The Chin Yuen house was at his right.

“Good evening,” said the young man. “Good evening,” returned Mr. Spring
Fragrance. He stepped down from his porch and went and leaned over the
railing which separated this yard from the yard in which stood the young
man.

“Will you please tell me,” said Mr. Spring Fragrance, “the meaning of
two lines of an American verse which I have heard?”

“Certainly,” returned the young man with a genial smile. He was a star
student at the University of Washington, and had not the slightest doubt
that he could explain the meaning of all things in the universe.

“Well,” said Mr. Spring Fragrance, “it is this:

                  “’Tis better to have loved and lost,
                  Than never to have loved at all.”

“Ah!” responded the young man with an air of profound wisdom. “That, Mr.
Spring Fragrance, means that it is a good thing to love anyway—even if
we can’t get what we love, or, as the poet tells us, lose what we love.
Of course, one needs experience to feel the truth of this teaching.”

The young man smiled pensively and reminiscently. More than a dozen
young maidens “loved and lost” were passing before his mind’s eye.

“The truth of the teaching!” echoed Mr. Spring Fragrance, a little
testily. “There is no truth in it whatever. It is disobedient to reason.
Is it not better to have what you do not love than to love what you do
not have?”

“That depends,” answered the young man, “upon temperament.”

“I thank you. Good evening,” said Mr. Spring Fragrance. He turned away
to muse upon the unwisdom of the American way of looking at things.

Meanwhile, inside the house, Laura was refusing to be comforted.

“Ah, no! no!” cried she. “If I had not gone to school with Kai Tzu, nor
talked nor walked with him, nor played the accompaniments to his songs,
then I might consider with complacency, or at least without horror, my
approaching marriage with the son of Man You. But as it is—oh, as it
is—!”

The girl rocked herself to and fro in heartfelt grief.

Mrs. Spring Fragrance knelt down beside her, and clasping her arms
around her neck, cried in sympathy:

“Little Sister, oh, Little Sister! Dry your tears—do not despair. A moon
has yet to pass before the marriage can take place. Who knows what the
stars may have to say to one another during its passing? A little bird
has whispered to me—”

For a long time Mrs. Spring Fragrance talked. For a long time Laura
listened. When the girl arose to go, there was a bright light in her
eyes.


                                   II

Mrs. Spring Fragrance, in San Francisco on a visit to her cousin, the
wife of the herb doctor of Clay Street, was having a good time. She was
invited everywhere that the wife of an honorable Chinese merchant could
go. There was much to see and hear, including more than a dozen babies
who had been born in the families of her friends since she last visited
the city of the Golden Gate. Mrs. Spring Fragrance loved babies. She had
had two herself, but both had been transplanted into the spirit land
before the completion of even one moon. There were also many dinners and
theatre-parties given in her honor. It was at one of the theatre-parties
that Mrs. Spring Fragrance met Ah Oi, a young girl who had the
reputation of being the prettiest Chinese girl in San Francisco, and the
naughtiest. In spite of gossip, however, Mrs. Spring Fragrance took a
great fancy to Ah Oi and invited her to a tête-à-tête picnic on the
following day. This invitation Ah Oi joyfully accepted. She was a sort
of bird girl and never felt so happy as when out in the park or woods.

On the day after the picnic Mrs. Spring Fragrance wrote to Laura Chin
Yuen thus:

  MY PRECIOUS LAURA,—May the bamboo ever wave. Next week I accompany Ah
  Oi to the beauteous town of San José. There will we be met by the son
  of the Illustrious Teacher, and in a little Mission, presided over by
  a benevolent American priest, the little Ah Oi and the son of the
  Illustrious Teacher will be joined together in love and harmony—two
  pieces of music made to complete one another.

  The Son of the Illustrious Teacher, having been through an American
  Hall of Learning, is well able to provide for his orphan bride and
  fears not the displeasure of his parents, now that he is assured that
  your grief at his loss will not be inconsolable. He wishes me to waft
  to you and to Kai Tzu—and the little Ah Oi joins with him—ten thousand
  rainbow wishes for your happiness.

  My respects to your honorable parents, and to yourself, the heart of
  your loving friend,

                                               JADE SPRING FRAGRANCE

To Mr. Spring Fragrance, Mrs. Spring Fragrance also indited a letter:

  GREAT AND HONORED MAN,—Greeting from your plum blossom,[1] who is
  desirous of hiding herself from the sun of your presence for a week of
  seven days more. My honorable cousin is preparing for the Fifth Moon
  Festival, and wishes me to compound for the occasion some American
  “fudge,” for which delectable sweet, made by my clumsy hands, you have
  sometimes shown a slight prejudice. I am enjoying a most agreeable
  visit, and American friends, as also our own, strive benevolently for
  the accomplishment of my pleasure. Mrs. Samuel Smith, an American
  lady, known to my cousin, asked for my accompaniment to a magniloquent
  lecture the other evening. The subject was “America, the Protector of
  China!” It was most exhilarating, and the effect of so much expression
  of benevolence leads me to beg of you to forget to remember that the
  barber charges you one dollar for a shave while he humbly submits to
  the American man a bill of fifteen cents. And murmur no more because
  your honored elder brother, on a visit to this country, is detained
  under the roof-tree of this great Government instead of under your own
  humble roof. Console him with the reflection that he is protected
  under the wing of the Eagle, the Emblem of Liberty. What is the loss
  of ten hundred years or ten thousand times ten dollars compared with
  the happiness of knowing oneself so securely sheltered? All of this I
  have learned from Mrs. Samuel Smith, who is as brilliant and great of
  mind as one of your own superior sex.

  For me it is sufficient to know that the Golden Gate Park is most
  enchanting, and the seals on the rock at the Cliff House extremely
  entertaining and amiable. There is much feasting and merry-making
  under the lanterns in honor of your Stupid Thorn.

  I have purchased for your smoking a pipe with an amber mouth. It is
  said to be very sweet to the lips and to emit a cloud of smoke fit for
  the gods to inhale.

  Awaiting, by the wonderful wire of the telegram message, your gracious
  permission to remain for the celebration of the Fifth Moon Festival
  and the making of American “fudge,” I continue for ten thousand times
  ten thousand years,

                                Your ever loving and obedient woman,
                                                               JADE

  P.S. Forget not to care for the cat, the birds, and the flowers. Do
  not eat too quickly nor fan too vigorously now that the weather is
  warming.

Footnote 1:

  The plum blossom is the Chinese flower of virtue. It has been adopted
  by the Japanese, just in the same way as they have adopted the Chinese
  national flower, the chrysanthemum.

Mrs. Spring Fragrance smiled as she folded this last epistle. Even if he
were old-fashioned, there was never a husband so good and kind as hers.
Only on one occasion since their marriage had he slighted her wishes.
That was when, on the last anniversary of their wedding, she had
signified a desire for a certain jadestone pendant, and he had failed to
satisfy that desire.

But Mrs Spring Fragrance, being of a happy nature, and disposed to look
upon the bright side of things, did not allow her mind to dwell upon the
jadestone pendant. Instead, she gazed complacently down upon her
bejeweled fingers and folded in with her letter to Mr. Spring Fragrance
a bright little sheaf of condensed love.


                                  III

Mr. Spring Fragrance sat on his doorstep. He had been reading two
letters, one from Mrs. Spring Fragrance, and the other from an elderly
bachelor cousin in San Francisco. The one from the elderly bachelor
cousin was a business letter, but contained the following postscript:

  Tsen Hing, the son of the Government school-master, seems to be much
  in the company of your young wife. He is a good-looking youth, and
  pardon me, my dear cousin; but if women are allowed to stray at will
  from under their husbands’ mulberry roofs, what is to prevent them
  from becoming butterflies?

“Sing Foon is old and cynical,” said Mr. Spring Fragrance to himself.
“Why should I pay any attention to him? This is America, where a man may
speak to a woman, and a woman listen, without any thought of evil.”

He destroyed his cousin’s letter and re-read his wife’s. Then he became
very thoughtful. Was the making of American fudge sufficient reason for
a wife to wish to remain a week longer in a city where her husband was
not?

The young man who lived in the next house came out to water the lawn.

“Good evening,” said he. “Any news from Mrs. Spring Fragrance?”

“She is having a very good time,” returned Mr. Spring Fragrance.

“Glad to hear it. I think you told me she was to return the end of this
week.”

“I have changed my mind about her,” said Mr. Spring Fragrance. “I am
bidding her remain a week longer, as I wish to give a smoking party
during her absence. I hope I may have the pleasure of your company.”

“I shall be delighted,” returned the young fellow. “But, Mr. Spring
Fragrance, don’t invite any other white fellows. If you do not I shall
be able to get in a scoop. You know, I’m a sort of honorary reporter for
the _Gleaner_.”

“Very well,” absently answered Mr. Spring Fragrance.

“Of course, your friend the Consul will be present. I shall call it ‘A
high-class Chinese stag party!’”

In spite of his melancholy mood, Mr. Spring Fragrance smiled.

“Everything is ‘high-class’ in America,” he observed.

“Sure!” cheerfully assented the young man. “Haven’t you ever heard that
all Americans are princes and princesses, and just as soon as a
foreigner puts his foot upon our shores, he also becomes of the
nobility—I mean, the royal family.”

“What about my brother in the Detention Pen?” dryly inquired Mr. Spring
Fragrance.

“Now, you’ve got me,” said the young man, rubbing his head. “Well, that
is a shame—‘a beastly shame,’ as the Englishman says. But understand,
old fellow, we that are real Americans are up against that—even more
than you. It is against our principles.”

“I offer the real Americans my consolations that they should be
compelled to do that which is against their principles.”

“Oh, well, it will all come right some day. We’re not a bad sort, you
know. Think of the indemnity money returned to the Dragon by Uncle Sam.”

Mr. Spring Fragrance puffed his pipe in silence for some moments. More
than politics was troubling his mind.

At last he spoke. “Love,” said he, slowly and distinctly, “comes before
the wedding in this country, does it not?”

“Yes, certainly.”

Young Carman knew Mr. Spring Fragrance well enough to receive with
calmness his most astounding queries.

“Presuming,” continued Mr. Spring Fragrance—“presuming that some friend
of your father’s, living—presuming—in England—has a daughter that he
arranges with your father to be your wife. Presuming that you have never
seen that daughter, but that you marry her, knowing her not. Presuming
that she marries you, knowing you not.—After she marries you and knows
you, will that woman love you?”

“Emphatically, no,” answered the young man.

“That is the way it would be in America—that the woman who marries the
man like that—would not love him?”

“Yes, that is the way it would be in America. Love, in this country,
must be free, or it is not love at all.”

“In China, it is different!” mused Mr. Spring Fragrance.

“Oh, yes, I have no doubt that in China it is different.”

“But the love is in the heart all the same,” went on Mr. Spring
Fragrance.

“Yes, all the same. Everybody falls in love some time or another.
Some”—pensively—“many times.”

Mr. Spring Fragrance arose.

“I must go down town,” said he.

As he walked down the street he recalled the remark of a business
acquaintance who had met his wife and had had some conversation with
her: “She is just like an American woman.”

He had felt somewhat flattered when this remark had been made. He looked
upon it as a compliment to his wife’s cleverness; but it rankled in his
mind as he entered the telegraph office. If his wife was becoming as an
American woman, would it not be possible for her to love as an American
woman—a man to whom she was not married? There also floated in his
memory the verse which his wife had quoted to the daughter of Chin Yuen.
When the telegraph clerk handed him a blank, he wrote this message:

“Remain as you wish, but remember that ‘’Tis better to have loved and
lost, than never to have loved at all.’”

When Mrs. Spring Fragrance received this message, her laughter tinkled
like falling water. How droll! How delightful! Here was her husband
quoting American poetry in a telegram. Perhaps he had been reading her
American poetry books since she had left him! She hoped so. They would
lead him to understand her sympathy for her dear Laura and Kai Tzu. She
need no longer keep from him their secret. How joyful! It had been such
a hardship to refrain from confiding in him before. But discreetness had
been most necessary, seeing that Mr. Spring Fragrance entertained as
old-fashioned notions concerning marriage as did the Chin Yuen parents.
Strange that that should be so, since he had fallen in love with her
picture before _ever_ he had seen her, just as she had fallen in love
with his! And when the marriage veil was lifted and each beheld the
other for the first time in the flesh, there had been no disillusion—no
lessening of the respect and affection, which those who had brought
about the marriage had inspired in each young heart.

Mrs. Spring Fragrance began to wish she could fall asleep and wake to
find the week flown, and she in her own little home pouring tea for Mr.
Spring Fragrance.


                                   IV

Mr. Spring Fragrance was walking to business with Mr. Chin Yuen. As they
walked they talked.

“Yes,” said Mr. Chin Yuen, “the old order is passing away, and the new
order is taking its place, even with us who are Chinese. I have finally
consented to give my daughter in marriage to young Kai Tzu.”

Mr. Spring Fragrance expressed surprise. He had understood that the
marriage between his neighbor’s daughter and the San Francisco
school-teacher’s son was all arranged.

“So ’twas,” answered Mr. Chin Yuen; “but, it seems the young renegade,
without consultation or advice, has placed his affections upon some
untrustworthy female, and is so under her influence that he refuses to
fulfil his parents’ promise to me for him.”

“So!” said Mr. Spring Fragrance. The shadow on his brow deepened.

“But,” said Mr. Chin Yuen, with affable resignation, “it is all ordained
by Heaven. Our daughter, as the wife of Kai Tzu, for whom she has long
had a loving feeling, will not now be compelled to dwell with a
mother-in-law and where her own mother is not. For that, we are
thankful, as she is our only one and the conditions of life in this
Western country are not as in China. Moreover, Kai Tzu, though not so
much of a scholar as the teacher’s son, has a keen eye for business and
that, in America, is certainly much more desirable than scholarship.
What do you think?”

“Eh! What!” exclaimed Mr. Spring Fragrance. The latter part of his
companion’s remarks had been lost upon him.

That day the shadow which had been following Mr. Spring Fragrance ever
since he had heard his wife quote, “’Tis better to have loved,” etc.,
became so heavy and deep that he quite lost himself within it.

At home in the evening he fed the cat, the bird, and the flowers. Then,
seating himself in a carved black chair—a present from his wife on his
last birthday—he took out his pipe and smoked. The cat jumped into his
lap. He stroked it softly and tenderly. It had been much fondled by Mrs.
Spring Fragrance, and Mr. Spring Fragrance was under the impression that
it missed her. “Poor thing!” said he. “I suppose you want her back!”
When he arose to go to bed he placed the animal carefully on the floor,
and thus apostrophized it:

“O Wise and Silent One, your mistress returns to you, but her heart she
leaves behind her, with the Tommies in San Francisco.”

The Wise and Silent One made no reply. He was not a jealous cat.

Mr. Spring Fragrance slept not that night; the next morning he ate not.
Three days and three nights without sleep and food went by.

There was a springlike freshness in the air on the day that Mrs. Spring
Fragrance came home. The skies overhead were as blue as Puget Sound
stretching its gleaming length toward the mighty Pacific, and all the
beautiful green world seemed to be throbbing with springing life.

Mrs. Spring Fragrance was never so radiant.

“Oh,” she cried light-heartedly, “is it not lovely to see the sun
shining so clear, and everything so bright to welcome me?”

Mr. Spring Fragrance made no response. It was the morning after the
fourth sleepless night.

Mrs. Spring Fragrance noticed his silence, also his grave face.

“Everything—everyone is glad to see me but you,” she declared, half
seriously, half jestingly.

Mr. Spring Fragrance set down her valise. They had just entered the
house.

“If my wife is glad to see me,” he quietly replied, “I also am glad to
see her!”

Summoning their servant boy, he bade him look after Mrs. Spring
Fragrance’s comfort.

“I must be at the store in half an hour,” said he, looking at his watch.
“There is some very important business requiring attention.”

“What is the business?” inquired Mrs. Spring Fragrance, her lip
quivering with disappointment.

“I cannot just explain to you,” answered her husband.

Mrs. Spring Fragrance looked up into his face with honest and earnest
eyes. There was something in his manner, in the tone of her husband’s
voice, which touched her.

“Yen,” said she, “you do not look well. You are not well. What is it?”

Something arose in Mr. Spring Fragrance’s throat which prevented him
from replying.

“O darling one! O sweetest one!” cried a girl’s joyous voice. Laura Chin
Yuen ran into the room and threw her arms around Mrs. Spring Fragrance’s
neck.

“I spied you from the window,” said Laura, “and I couldn’t rest until I
told you. We are to be married next week, Kai Tzu and I. And all through
you, all through you—the sweetest jade jewel in the world!”

Mr. Spring Fragrance passed out of the room.

“So the son of the Government teacher and little Happy Love are already
married,” Laura went on, relieving Mrs. Spring Fragrance of her cloak,
her hat, and her folding fan. Mr. Spring Fragrance paused upon the
doorstep.

“Sit down, Little Sister, and I will tell you all about it,” said Mrs.
Spring Fragrance, forgetting her husband for a moment.

When Laura Chin Yuen had danced away, Mr. Spring Fragrance came in and
hung up his hat.

“You got back very soon,” said Mrs. Spring Fragrance, covertly wiping
away the tears which had begun to fall as soon as she thought herself
alone.

“I did not go,” answered Mr. Spring Fragrance. “I have been listening to
you and Laura.”

“But if the business is very important, do not you think you should
attend to it?” anxiously queried Mrs. Spring Fragrance.

“It is not important to me now,” returned Mr. Spring Fragrance. “I would
prefer to hear again about Ah Oi and Man You and Laura and Kai Tzu.”

“How lovely of you to say that!” exclaimed Mrs. Spring Fragrance, who
was easily made happy. And she began to chat away to her husband in the
friendliest and wifeliest fashion possible. When she had finished she
asked him if he were not glad to hear that those who loved as did the
young lovers whose secrets she had been keeping, were to be united; and
he replied that indeed he was; that he would like every man to be as
happy with a wife as he himself had ever been and ever would be.

“You did not always talk like that,” said Mrs. Spring Fragrance slyly.
“You must have been reading my American poetry books!”

“American poetry!” ejaculated Mr. Spring Fragrance almost fiercely,
“American poetry is detestable, _abhorrable_!”

“Why! why!” exclaimed Mrs. Spring Fragrance, more and more surprised.

But the only explanation which Mr. Spring Fragrance vouchsafed was a
jadestone pendant.




                           THE INFERIOR WOMAN


                                   I

Mrs. Spring Fragrance walked through the leafy alleys of the park,
admiring the flowers and listening to the birds singing. It was a
beautiful afternoon with the warmth from the sun cooled by a refreshing
breeze. As she walked along she meditated upon a book which she had some
notion of writing. Many American women wrote books. Why should not a
Chinese? She would write a book about Americans for her Chinese women
friends. The American people were so interesting and mysterious.
Something of pride and pleasure crept into Mrs. Spring Fragrance’s heart
as she pictured Fei and Sie and Mai Gwi Far listening to Lae-Choo
reading her illuminating paragraphs.

As she turned down a by-path she saw Will Carman, her American
neighbor’s son, coming towards her, and by his side a young girl who
seemed to belong to the sweet air and brightness of all the things
around her. They were talking very earnestly and the eyes of the young
man were on the girl’s face.

“Ah!” murmured Mrs. Spring Fragrance, after one swift glance. “It is
love.”

She retreated behind a syringa bush, which completely screened her from
view.

Up the winding path went the young couple.

“It is love,” repeated Mrs. Spring Fragrance, “and it is the ‘Inferior
Woman.’”

She had heard about the Inferior Woman from the mother of Will Carman.

After tea that evening Mrs. Spring Fragrance stood musing at her front
window. The sun hovered over the Olympic mountains like a great, golden
red-bird with dark purple wings, its long tail of light trailing
underneath in the waters of Puget Sound.

“How very beautiful!” exclaimed Mrs. Spring Fragrance; then she sighed.

“Why do you sigh?” asked Mr. Spring Fragrance.

“My heart is sad,” answered his wife.

“Is the cat sick?” inquired Mr. Spring Fragrance.

Mrs. Spring Fragrance shook her head. “It is not our Wise One who
troubles me today,” she replied. “It is our neighbors. The sorrow of the
Carman household is that the mother desires for her son the Superior
Woman, and his heart enshrines but the Inferior. I have seen them
together today, and I know.”

“What do you know?”

“That the Inferior Woman is the mate for young Carman.”

Mr. Spring Fragrance elevated his brows. Only the day before, his wife’s
arguments had all been in favor of the Superior Woman. He uttered some
words expressive of surprise, to which Mrs. Spring Fragrance retorted:

“Yesterday, O Great Man, I was a caterpillar!”

Just then young Carman came strolling up the path. Mr. Spring Fragrance
opened the door to him. “Come in, neighbor,” said he. “I have received
some new books from Shanghai.”

“Good,” replied young Carman, who was interested in Chinese literature.
While he and Mr. Spring Fragrance discussed the “Odes of Chow” and the
“Sorrows of Han,” Mrs. Spring Fragrance, sitting in a low easy-chair of
rose-colored silk, covertly studied her visitor’s countenance. Why was
his expression so much more grave than gay? It had not been so a year
ago—before he had known the Inferior Woman. Mrs. Spring Fragrance noted
other changes, also, both in speech and manner. “He is no longer a boy,”
mused she. “He is a man, and it is the work of the Inferior Woman.”

“And when, Mr. Carman,” she inquired, “will you bring home a daughter to
your mother?”

“And when, Mrs. Spring Fragrance, do you think I should?” returned the
young man.

Mrs. Spring Fragrance spread wide her fan and gazed thoughtfully over
its silver edge.

“The summer moons will soon be over,” said she. “You should not wait
until the grass is yellow.”

               “The woodmen’s blows responsive ring,
                 As on the trees they fall,
               And when the birds their sweet notes sing,
                 They to each other call.
               From the dark valley comes a bird,
                 And seeks the lofty tree,
               _Ying_ goes its voice, and thus it cries:
                 ‘Companion, come to me.’
               The bird, although a creature small
                 Upon its mate depends,
               And shall we men, who rank o’er all,
                 Not seek to have our friends?”

quoted Mr. Spring Fragrance.

Mrs. Spring Fragrance tapped his shoulder approvingly with her fan.

“I perceive,” said young Carman, “that you are both allied against my
peace.”

“It is for your mother,” replied Mrs. Spring Fragrance soothingly. “She
will be happy when she knows that your affections are fixed by
marriage.”

There was a slight gleam of amusement in the young man’s eyes as he
answered: “But if my mother has no wish for a daughter—at least, no wish
for the daughter I would want to give her?”

“When I first came to America,” returned Mrs. Spring Fragrance, “my
husband desired me to wear the American dress. I protested and declared
that never would I so appear. But one day he brought home a gown fit for
a fairy, and ever since then I have worn and adored the American dress.”

“Mrs. Spring Fragrance,” declared young Carman, “your argument is
incontrovertible.”


                                   II

A young man with a determined set to his shoulders stood outside the
door of a little cottage perched upon a bluff overlooking the Sound. The
chill sea air was sweet with the scent of roses, and he drew in a deep
breath of inspiration before he knocked.

“Are you not surprised to see me?” he inquired of the young person who
opened the door.

“Not at all,” replied the young person demurely.

He gave her a quick almost fierce look. At their last parting he had
declared that he would not come again unless she requested him, and that
she assuredly had not done.

“I wish I could make you feel,” said he.

She laughed—a pretty infectious laugh which exorcised all his gloom. He
looked down upon her as they stood together under the cluster of
electric lights in her cozy little sitting-room. Such a slender, girlish
figure! Such a soft cheek, red mouth, and firm little chin! Often in his
dreams of her he had taken her into his arms and coaxed her into a good
humor. But, alas! dreams are not realities, and the calm friendliness of
this young person made any demonstration of tenderness well-nigh
impossible. But for the shy regard of her eyes, you might have thought
that he was no more to her than a friendly acquaintance.

“I hear,” said she, taking up some needlework, “that your Welland case
comes on tomorrow.”

“Yes,” answered the young lawyer, “and I have all my witnesses ready.”

“So, I hear, has Mr. Greaves,” she retorted. “You are going to have a
hard fight.”

“What of that, when in the end I’ll win.”

He looked over at her with a bright gleam in his eyes.

“I wouldn’t be too sure,” she warned demurely. “You may lose on a
technicality.”

He drew his chair a little nearer to her side and turned over the pages
of a book lying on her work-table. On the fly-leaf was inscribed in a
man’s writing: “To the dear little woman whose friendship is worth a
fortune.”

Another book beside it bore the inscription: “With the love of all the
firm, including the boys,” and a volume of poems above it was dedicated
to the young person “with the high regards and stanch affection” of some
other masculine person.

Will Carman pushed aside these evidences of his sweetheart’s popularity
with his own kind and leaned across the table.

“Alice,” said he, “once upon a time you admitted that you loved me.”

A blush suffused the young person’s countenance.

“Did I?” she queried.

“You did, indeed.”

“Well?”

“Well! If you love me and I love you—”

“Oh, please!” protested the girl, covering her ears with her hands.

“I _will_ please,” asserted the young man. “I have come here tonight,
Alice, to ask you to marry me—and at once.”

“Deary me!” exclaimed the young person; but she let her needlework fall
into her lap as her lover, approaching nearer, laid his arm around her
shoulders and, bending his face close to hers, pleaded his most
important case.

If for a moment the small mouth quivered, the firm little chin lost its
firmness, and the proud little head yielded to the pressure of a lover’s
arm, it was only for a moment so brief and fleeting that Will Carman had
hardly become aware of it before it had passed.

“No,” said the young person sorrowfully but decidedly. She had arisen
and was standing on the other side of the table facing him. “I cannot
marry you while your mother regards me as beneath you.”

“When she, knows you she will acknowledge you are above me. But I am not
asking you to come to my mother, I am asking you to come to me, dear. If
you will put your hand in mine and trust to me through all the coming
years, no man or woman born can come between us.”

But the young person shook her head.

“No,” she repeated. “I will not be your wife unless your mother welcomes
me with pride and with pleasure.”

The night air was still sweet with the perfume of roses as Will Carman
passed out of the little cottage door; but he drew in no deep breath of
inspiration. His impetuous Irish heart was too heavy with
disappointment. It might have been a little lighter, however, had he
known that the eyes of the young person who gazed after him were misty
with a love and yearning beyond expression.


                                  III

“Will Carman has failed to snare his bird,” said Mr. Spring Fragrance
to Mrs. Spring Fragrance.

Their neighbor’s son had just passed their veranda without turning to
bestow upon them his usual cheerful greeting.

“It is too bad,” sighed Mrs. Spring Fragrance sympathetically. She
clasped her hands together and exclaimed:

“Ah, these Americans! These mysterious, inscrutable, incomprehensible
Americans! Had I the divine right of learning I would put them into an
immortal book!”

“The divine right of learning,” echoed Mr. Spring Fragrance, “Humph!”

Mrs. Spring Fragrance looked up into her husband’s face in wonderment.

“Is not the authority of the scholar, the student, almost divine?” she
queried.

“So ’tis said,” responded he. “So it seems.”

The evening before, Mr. Spring Fragrance, together with several Seattle
and San Francisco merchants, had given a dinner to a number of young
students who had just arrived from China. The morning papers had devoted
several columns to laudation of the students, prophecies as to their
future, and the great influence which they would exercise over the
destiny of their nation; but no comment whatever was made on the givers
of the feast, and Mr. Spring Fragrance was therefore feeling somewhat
unappreciated. Were not he and his brother merchants worthy of a little
attention? If the students had come to learn things in America, they,
the merchants, had accomplished things. There were those amongst them
who had been instrumental in bringing several of the students to
America. One of the boys was Mr. Spring Fragrance’s own young brother,
for whose maintenance and education he had himself sent the wherewithal
every year for many years. Mr. Spring Fragrance, though well read in the
Chinese classics, was not himself a scholar. As a boy he had come to the
shores of America, worked his way up, and by dint of painstaking study
after working hours acquired the Western language and Western business
ideas. He had made money, saved money, and sent money home. The years
had flown, his business had grown. Through his efforts trade between his
native town and the port city in which he lived had greatly increased. A
school in Canton was being builded in part with funds furnished by him,
and a railway syndicate, for the purpose of constructing a line of
railway from the big city of Canton to his own native town, was under
process of formation, with the name of Spring Fragrance at its head.

No wonder then that Mr. Spring Fragrance muttered “Humph!” when Mrs.
Spring Fragrance dilated upon the “divine right of learning,” and that
he should feel irritated and humiliated, when, after explaining to her
his grievances, she should quote in the words of Confutze: “Be not
concerned that men do not know you; be only concerned that you do not
know them.” And he had expected wifely sympathy.

He was about to leave the room in a somewhat chilled state of mind when
she surprised him again by pattering across to him and following up a
low curtsy with these words:

“I bow to you as the grass bends to the wind. Allow me to detain you for
just one moment.”

Mr. Spring Fragrance eyed her for a moment with suspicion.

“As I have told you, O Great Man,” continued Mrs. Spring Fragrance, “I
desire to write an immortal book, and now that I have learned from you
that it is not necessary to acquire the ‘divine right of learning’ in
order to accomplish things, I will begin the work without delay. My
first subject will be ‘The Inferior Woman of America.’ Please advise me
how I shall best inform myself concerning her.”

Mr. Spring Fragrance, perceiving that his wife was now serious, and
being easily mollified, sat himself down and rubbed his head. After
thinking for a few moments he replied:

“It is the way in America, when a person is to be illustrated, for the
illustrator to interview the person’s friends. Perhaps, my dear, you had
better confer with the Superior Woman.”

“Surely,” cried Mrs. Spring Fragrance, “no sage was ever so wise as my
Great Man.”

“But I lack the ‘divine right of learning,’” dryly deplored Mr. Spring
Fragrance.

“I am happy to hear it,” answered Mrs. Spring Fragrance. “If you were a
scholar you would have no time to read American poetry and American
newspapers.”

Mr. Spring Fragrance laughed heartily.

“You are no Chinese woman,” he teased. “You are an American.”

“Please bring me my parasol and my folding fan,” said Mrs. Spring
Fragrance. “I am going out for a walk.”

And Mr. Spring Fragrance obeyed her.


                                   IV

“This is from Mary Carman, who is in Portland,” said the mother of the
Superior Woman, looking up from the reading of a letter, as her daughter
came in from the garden.

“Indeed,” carelessly responded Miss Evebrook.

“Yes, it’s chiefly about Will.”

“Oh, is it? Well, read it then, dear. I’m interested in Will Carman,
because of Alice Winthrop.”

“I had hoped, Ethel, at one time that you would have been interested in
him for his own sake. However, this is what she writes:

  “I came here chiefly to rid myself of a melancholy mood which has
  taken possession of me lately, and also because I cannot bear to see
  my boy so changed towards me, owing to his infatuation for Alice
  Winthrop. It is incomprehensible to me how a son of mine can find any
  pleasure whatever in the society of such a girl. I have traced her
  history, and find that she is not only uneducated in the ordinary
  sense, but her environment, from childhood up, has been the sordid and
  demoralizing one of extreme poverty and ignorance. This girl, Alice,
  entered a law office at the age of fourteen, supposedly to do the work
  of an office boy. Now, after seven years in business, through the
  friendship and influence of men far above her socially, she holds the
  position of private secretary to the most influential man in
  Washington—a position which by rights belongs only to a well-educated
  young woman of good family. Many such applied. I myself sought to have
  Jane Walker appointed. Is it not disheartening to our woman’s cause to
  be compelled to realize that girls such as this one can win men over
  to be their friends and lovers, when there are so many splendid young
  women who have been carefully trained to be companions and comrades of
  educated men?”

“Pardon me, mother,” interrupted Miss Evebrook, “but I have heard
enough. Mrs. Carman is your friend and a well-meaning woman sometimes;
but a woman suffragist, in the true sense, she certainly is not. Mark my
words: If any young man had accomplished for himself what Alice Winthrop
has accomplished, Mrs. Carman could not have said enough in his praise.
It is women such as Alice Winthrop who, in spite of every drawback, have
raised themselves to the level of those who have had every advantage,
who are the pride and glory of America. There are thousands of them, all
over this land: women who have been of service to others all their years
and who have graduated from the university of life with honor. Women
such as I, who are called the Superior Women of America, are after all
nothing but schoolgirls in comparison.”

Mrs. Evebrook eyed her daughter mutinously. “I don’t see why you should
feel like that,” said she. “Alice is a dear bright child, and it is
prejudice engendered by Mary Carman’s disappointment about you and Will
which is the real cause of poor Mary’s bitterness towards her; but to my
mind, Alice does not compare with my daughter. She would be frightened
to death if she had to make a speech.”

“You foolish mother!” rallied Miss Evebrook. “To stand upon a platform
at woman suffrage meetings and exploit myself is certainly a great
recompense to you and father for all the sacrifices you have made in my
behalf. But since it pleases you, I do it with pleasure even on the
nights when my beau should ‘come a courting.’”

“There is many a one who would like to come, Ethel. You’re the
handsomest girl in this Western town—and you know it.”

“Stop that, mother. You know very well I have set my mind upon having
ten years’ freedom; ten years in which to love, live, suffer, see the
world, and learn about men (not schoolboys) before I choose one.”

“Alice Winthrop is the same age as you are, and looks like a child
beside you.”

“Physically, maybe; but her heart and mind are better developed. She has
been out in the world all her life, I only a few months.”

“Your lecture last week on ‘The Opposite Sex’ was splendid.”

“Of course. I have studied one hundred books on the subject and attended
fifty lectures. All that was necessary was to repeat in an original
manner what was not by any means original.”

Miss Evebrook went over to a desk and took a paper therefrom.

“This,” said she, “is what Alice has written me in reply to my note
suggesting that she attend next week the suffrage meeting, and give some
of the experiences of her business career. The object I had in view when
I requested the relation of her experiences was to use them as
illustrations of the suppression and oppression of women by men. Strange
to say, Alice and I have never conversed on this particular subject. If
we had I would not have made this request of her, nor written her as I
did. Listen:

  “I should dearly love to please you, but I am afraid that my
  experiences, if related, would not help the cause. It may be, as you
  say, that men prevent women from rising to their level; but if there
  are such men, I have not met them. Ever since, when a little girl, I
  walked into a law office and asked for work, and the senior member
  kindly looked me over through his spectacles and inquired if I thought
  I could learn to index books, and the junior member glanced under my
  hat and said: “This is a pretty little girl and we must be pretty to
  her,” I have loved and respected the men amongst whom I have worked
  and wherever I have worked. I may have been exceptionally fortunate,
  but I know this: the men for whom I have worked and amongst whom I
  have spent my life, whether they have been business or professional
  men, students or great lawyers and politicians, all alike have upheld
  me, inspired me, advised me, taught me, given me a broad outlook upon
  life for a woman; interested me in themselves and in their work. As to
  corrupting my mind and my morals, as you say so many men do, when they
  have young and innocent girls to deal with: As a woman I look back
  over my years spent amongst business and professional men, and see
  myself, as I was at first, an impressionable, ignorant little girl,
  born a Bohemian, easy to lead and easy to win, but borne aloft and
  morally supported by the goodness of my brother men, the men amongst
  whom I worked. That is why, dear Ethel, you will have to forgive me,
  because I cannot carry out your design, and help your work, as
  otherwise I would like to do.”

“That, mother,” declared Miss Evebrook, “answers all Mrs. Carman’s
insinuations, and should make her ashamed of herself. Can any one know
the sentiments which little Alice entertains toward men, and wonder at
her winning out as she has?”

Mrs. Evebrook was about to make reply, when her glance happening to
stray out of the window, she noticed a pink parasol.

“Mrs. Spring Fragrance!” she ejaculated, while her daughter went to the
door and invited in the owner of the pink parasol, who was seated in a
veranda rocker calmly writing in a note-book.

“I’m so sorry that we did not hear your ring, Mrs. Spring Fragrance,”
said she.

“There is no necessity for you to sorrow,” replied the little Chinese
woman. “I did not expect you to hear a ring which rang not. I failed to
pull the bell.”

“You forgot, I suppose,” suggested Ethel Evebrook.

“Is it wise to tell secrets?” ingenuously inquired Mrs. Spring
Fragrance.

“Yes, to your friends. Oh, Mrs. Spring Fragrance, you are _so_
refreshing.”

“I have pleasure, then, in confiding to you. I have an ambition to
accomplish an immortal book about the Americans, and the conversation I
heard through the window was so interesting to me that I thought I would
take some of it down for my book before I intruded myself. With your
kind permission I will translate for your correction.”

“I shall be delighted—honored,” said Miss Evebrook, her cheeks glowing
and her laugh rippling, “if you will promise me, that you will also
translate for our friend, Mrs. Carman.”

“Ah, yes, poor Mrs. Carman! My heart is so sad for her,” murmured the
little Chinese woman.


                                   V

When the mother of Will Carman returned from Portland, the first person
upon whom she called was Mrs. Spring Fragrance. Having lived in China
while her late husband was in the customs service there, Mrs. Carman’s
prejudices did not extend to the Chinese, and ever since the Spring
Fragrances had become the occupants of the villa beside the Carmans,
there had been social good feeling between the American and Chinese
families. Indeed, Mrs. Carman was wont to declare that amongst all her
acquaintances there was not one more congenial and interesting than
little Mrs. Spring Fragrance. So after she had sipped a cup of delicious
tea, tasted some piquant candied limes, and told Mrs. Spring Fragrance
all about her visit to the Oregon city and the Chinese people she had
met there, she reverted to a personal trouble confided to Mrs. Spring
Fragrance some months before and dwelt upon it for more than half an
hour. Then she checked herself and gazed at Mrs. Spring Fragrance in
surprise. Hitherto she had found the little Chinese woman sympathetic
and consoling. Chinese ideas of filial duty chimed in with her own. But
today Mrs. Spring Fragrance seemed strangely uninterested and
unresponsive.

“Perhaps,” gently suggested the American woman, who was nothing if not
sensitive, “you have some trouble yourself. If so, my dear, tell me all
about it.”

“Oh, no!” answered Mrs. Spring Fragrance brightly. “I have no troubles
to tell; but all the while I am thinking about the book I am writing.”

“A book!”

“Yes, a book about Americans, an immortal book.”

“My dear Mrs. Spring Fragrance!” exclaimed her visitor in amazement.

“The American woman writes books about the Chinese. Why not a Chinese
woman write books about the Americans?”

“I see what you mean. Why, yes, of course. What an original idea!”

“Yes, I think that is what it is. My book I shall take from the words of
others.”

“What do you mean, my dear?”

“I listen to what is said, I apprehend, I write it down. Let me
illustrate by the ‘Inferior Woman’ subject. The Inferior Woman is most
interesting to me because you have told me that your son is in much love
with her. My husband advised me to learn about the Inferior Woman from
the Superior Woman. I go to see the Superior Woman. I sit on the veranda
of the Superior Woman’s house. I listen to her converse with her mother
about the Inferior Woman. With the speed of flames I write down all I
hear. When I enter the house the Superior Woman advises me that what I
write is correct. May I read to you?”

“I shall be pleased to hear what you have written; but I do not think
you were wise in your choice of subject,” returned Mrs. Carman somewhat
primly.

“I am sorry I am not wise. Perhaps I had better not read?” said Mrs.
Spring Fragrance with humility.

“Yes, yes, do, please.”

There was eagerness in Mrs. Carman’s voice. What could Ethel Evebrook
have to say about that girl!

When Mrs. Spring Fragrance had finished reading, she looked up into the
face of her American friend—a face in which there was nothing now but
tenderness.

“Mrs. Mary Carman,” said she, “you are so good as to admire my husband
because he is what the Americans call ‘a man who has made himself.’ Why
then do you not admire the Inferior Woman who is a woman who has made
herself?”

“I think I do,” said Mrs. Carman slowly.


                                   VI

It was an evening that invited to reverie. The far stretches of the sea
were gray with mist, and the city itself, lying around the sweep of the
Bay, seemed dusky and distant. From her cottage window Alice Winthrop
looked silently at the open world around her. It seemed a long time
since she had heard Will Carman’s whistle. She wondered if he were still
angry with her. She was sorry that he had left her in anger, and yet not
sorry. If she had not made him believe that she was proud and selfish,
the parting would have been much harder; and perhaps had he known the
truth and realized that it was for his sake, and not for her own, that
she was sending him away from her, he might have refused to leave her at
all. His was such an imperious nature. And then they would have
married—right away. Alice caught her breath a little, and then she
sighed. But they would not have been happy. No, that could not have been
possible if his mother did not like her. When a gulf of prejudice lies
between the wife and mother of a man, that man’s life is not what it
should be. And even supposing she and Will could have lost themselves in
each other, and been able to imagine themselves perfectly satisfied with
life together, would it have been right? The question of right and wrong
was a very real one to Alice Winthrop. She put herself in the place of
the mother of her lover—a lonely elderly woman, a widow with an only
son, upon whom she had expended all her love and care ever since, in her
early youth, she had been bereaved of his father. What anguish of heart
would be hers if that son deserted her for one whom she, his mother,
deemed unworthy! Prejudices are prejudices. They are like diseases.

The poor, pale, elderly woman, who cherished bitter and resentful
feelings towards the girl whom her son loved, was more an object of pity
than condemnation to the girl herself.

She lifted her eyes to the undulating line of hills beyond the water.
From behind them came a silver light. “Yes,” said she aloud to
herself—and, though she knew it not, there was an infinite pathos in
such philosophy from one so young—“if life cannot be bright and
beautiful for me, at least it can be peaceful and contented.”

The light behind the hills died away; darkness crept over the sea. Alice
withdrew from the window and went and knelt before the open fire in her
sitting-room. Her cottage companion, the young woman who rented the
place with her, had not yet returned from town.

Alice did not turn on the light. She was seeing pictures in the fire,
and in every picture was the same face and form—the face and form of a
fine, handsome young man with love and hope in his eyes. No, not always
love and hope. In the last picture of all there was an expression which
she wished she could forget. And yet she would remember—ever—always—and
with it, these words: “Is it nothing to you—nothing—to tell a man that
you love him, and then to bid him go?”

Yes, but when she had told him she loved him she had not dreamed that
her love for him and his for her would estrange him from one who, before
ever she had come to this world, had pillowed his head on her breast.

Suddenly this girl, so practical, so humorous, so clever in every-day
life, covered her face with her hands and sobbed like a child. Two roads
of life had lain before her and she had chosen the hardest.

The warning bell of an automobile passing the cross-roads checked her
tears. That reminded her that Nellie Blake would soon be home. She
turned on the light and went to the bedroom and bathed her eyes. Nellie
must have forgotten her key. There she was knocking.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The chill sea air was sweet with the scent of roses as Mary Carman stood
upon the threshold of the little cottage, and beheld in the illumination
from within the young girl whom she had called “the Inferior Woman.”

“I have come, Miss Winthrop,” said she, “to beg of you to return home
with me. Will, reckless boy, met with a slight accident while out
shooting, so could not come for you himself. He has told me that he
loves you, and if you love him, I want to arrange for the prettiest
wedding of the season. Come, dear!”

“I am so glad,” said Mrs. Spring Fragrance, “that Will Carman’s bird is
in his nest and his felicity is assured.”

“What about the Superior Woman?” asked Mr. Spring Fragrance.

“Ah, the Superior Woman! Radiantly beautiful, and gifted with the divine
right of learning! I love well the Inferior Woman; but, O Great Man,
when we have a daughter, may Heaven ordain that she walk in the groove
of the Superior Woman.”




                         THE WISDOM OF THE NEW


                                   I

Old Li Wang, the peddler, who had lived in the land beyond the sea, was
wont to declare: “For every cent that a man makes here, he can make one
hundred there.”

“Then, why,” would ask Sankwei, “do you now have to move from door to
door to fill your bowl with rice?”

And the old man would sigh and answer:

“Because where one learns how to make gold, one also learns how to lose
it.”

“How to lose it!” echoed Wou Sankwei. “Tell me all about it.”

So the old man would tell stories about the winning and the losing, and
the stories of the losing were even more fascinating than the stories of
the winning.

“Yes, that was life,” he would conclude. “Life, life.”

At such times the boy would gaze across the water with wistful eyes. The
land beyond the sea was calling to him.

The place was a sleepy little south coast town where the years slipped
by monotonously. The boy was the only son of the man who had been the
town magistrate.

Had his father lived, Wou Sankwei would have been sent to complete his
schooling in another province. As it was he did nothing but sleep,
dream, and occasionally get into mischief. What else was there to do?
His mother and sister waited upon him hand and foot. Was he not the son
of the house? The family income was small, scarcely sufficient for their
needs; but there was no way by which he could add to it, unless, indeed,
he disgraced the name of Wou by becoming a common fisherman. The great
green waves lifted white arms of foam to him, and the fishes gleaming
and lurking in the waters seemed to beseech him to draw them from the
deep; but his mother shook her head.

“Should you become a fisherman,” said she, “your family would lose face.
Remember that your father was a magistrate.”

When he was about nineteen there returned to the town one who had been
absent for many years. Ching Kee, like old Li Wang, had also lived in
the land beyond the sea; but unlike old Li Wang he had accumulated a
small fortune.

“’Tis a hard life over there,” said he, “but ’tis worth while. At least
one can be a man, and can work at what work comes his way without losing
face.” Then he laughed at Wou Sankwei’s flabby muscles, at his soft,
dark eyes, and plump, white hands.

“If you lived in America,” said he, “you would learn to be ashamed of
such beauty.”

Whereupon Wou Sankwei made up his mind that he would go to America, the
land beyond the sea. Better any life than that of a woman man.

He talked long and earnestly with his mother. “Give me your blessing,”
said he. “I will work and save money. What I send home will bring you
many a comfort, and when I come back to China, it may be that I shall be
able to complete my studies and obtain a degree. If not, my knowledge of
the foreign language which I shall acquire, will enable me to take a
position which will not disgrace the name of Wou.”

His mother listened and thought. She was ambitious for her son whom she
loved beyond all things on earth. Moreover, had not Sik Ping, a Canton
merchant, who had visited the little town two moons ago, declared to Hum
Wah, who traded in palm leaves, that the signs of the times were that
the son of a cobbler, returned from America with the foreign language,
could easier command a position of consequence than the son of a
school-teacher unacquainted with any tongue but that of his motherland?

“Very well,” she acquiesced; “but before you go I must find you a wife.
Only your son, my son, can comfort me for your loss.”


                                   II

Wou Sankwei stood behind his desk, busily entering figures in a long
yellow book. Now and then he would thrust the hair pencil with which he
worked behind his ears and manipulate with deft fingers a Chinese
counting machine. Wou Sankwei was the junior partner and bookkeeper of
the firm of Leung Tang Wou & Co. of San Francisco. He had been in
America seven years and had made good use of his time. Self-improvement
had been his object and ambition, even more than the acquirement of a
fortune, and who, looking at his fine, intelligent face and listening to
his careful English, could say that he had failed?

One of his partners called his name. Some ladies wished to speak to him.
Wou Sankwei hastened to the front of the store. One of his callers, a
motherly looking woman, was the friend who had taken him under her wing
shortly after his arrival in America. She had come to invite him to
spend the evening with her and her niece, the young girl who accompanied
her.

After his callers had left, Sankwei returned to his desk and worked
steadily until the hour for his evening meal, which he took in the
Chinese restaurant across the street from the bazaar. He hurried through
with this, as before going to his friend’s house, he had a somewhat
important letter to write and mail. His mother had died a year before,
and the uncle, to whom he was writing, had taken his wife and son into
his home until such time as his nephew could send for them. Now the time
had come.

Wou Sankwei’s memory of the woman who was his wife was very faint. How
could it be otherwise? She had come to him but three weeks before the
sailing of the vessel which had brought him to America, and until then
he had not seen her face. But she was his wife and the mother of his
son. Ever since he had worked in America he had sent money for her
support, and she had proved a good daughter to his mother.

As he sat down to write he decided that he would welcome her with a big
dinner to his countrymen.

“Yes,” he replied to Mrs. Dean, later on in the evening, “I have sent
for my wife.”

“I am so glad,” said the lady. “Mr. Wou”—turning to her niece—“has not
seen his wife for seven years.”

“Deary me!” exclaimed the young girl. “What a lot of letters you must
have written!”

“I have not written her one,” returned the young man somewhat stiffly.

Adah Charlton looked up in surprise. “Why—” she began.

“Mr. Wou used to be such a studious boy when I first knew him,”
interrupted Mrs. Dean, laying her hand affectionately upon the young
man’s shoulder. “Now, it is all business. But you won’t forget the
concert on Saturday evening.”

“No, I will not forget,” answered Wou Sankwei.

“He has never written to his wife,” explained Mrs. Dean when she and her
niece were alone, “because his wife can neither read nor write.”

“Oh, isn’t that sad!” murmured Adah Charlton, her own winsome face
becoming pensive.

“They don’t seem to think so. It is the Chinese custom to educate only
the boys. At least it has been so in the past. Sankwei himself is
unusually bright. Poor boy! He began life here as a laundryman, and you
may be sure that it must have been hard on him, for, as the son of a
petty Chinese Government official, he had not been accustomed to manual
labor. But Chinese character is wonderful; and now after seven years in
this country, he enjoys a reputation as a business man amongst his
countrymen, and is as up to date as any young American.”

“But, Auntie, isn’t it dreadful to think that a man should live away
from his wife for so many years without any communication between them
whatsoever except through others.”

“It is dreadful to our minds, but not to theirs. Everything with them is
a matter of duty. Sankwei married his wife as a matter of duty. He sends
for her as a matter of duty.”

“I wonder if it is all duty on her side,” mused the girl.

Mrs. Dean smiled. “You are too romantic, Adah,” said she. “I hope,
however, that when she does come, they will be happy together. I think
almost as much of Sankwei as I do of my own boy.”


                                  III

Pau Lin, the wife of Wou Sankwei, sat in a corner of the deck of the big
steamer, awaiting the coming of her husband. Beside her, leaning his
little queued head against her shoulder, stood her six-year-old son. He
had been ailing throughout the voyage, and his small face was pinched
with pain. His mother, who had been nursing him every night since the
ship had left port, appeared very worn and tired. This, despite the fact
that with a feminine desire to make herself fair to see in the eyes of
her husband, she had arrayed herself in a heavily embroidered purple
costume, whitened her forehead and cheeks with powder, and tinted her
lips with carmine.

He came at last, looking over and beyond her; There were two others of
her countrywomen awaiting the men who had sent for them, and each had a
child, so that for a moment he seemed somewhat bewildered. Only when the
ship’s officer pointed out and named her, did he know her as his. Then
he came forward, spoke a few words of formal welcome, and, lifting the
child in his arms, began questioning her as to its health.

She answered in low monosyllables. At his greeting she had raised her
patient eyes to his face—the face of the husband whom she had not seen
for seven long years—then the eager look of expectancy which had crossed
her own faded away, her eyelids drooped, and her countenance assumed an
almost sullen expression.

“Ah, poor Sankwei!” exclaimed Mrs. Dean, who with Adah Charlton stood
some little distance apart from the family group.

“Poor wife!” murmured the young girl. She moved forward and would have
taken in her own white hands the ringed ones of the Chinese woman, but
the young man gently restrained her. “She cannot understand you,” said
he. As the young girl fell back, he explained to his wife the presence
of the stranger women. They were there to bid her welcome; they were
kind and good and wished to be her friends as well as his.

Pau Lin looked away. Adah Charlton’s bright face, and the tone in her
husband’s voice when he spoke to the young girl, aroused a suspicion in
her mind—a suspicion natural to one who had come from a land where
friendship between a man and woman is almost unknown.

“Poor little thing! How shy she is!” exclaimed Mrs. Dean.

Sankwei was glad that neither she nor the young girl understood the
meaning of the averted face.

Thus began Wou Sankwei’s life in America as a family man. He soon became
accustomed to the change, which was not such a great one after all. Pau
Lin was more of an accessory than a part of his life. She interfered not
at all with his studies, his business, or his friends, and when not
engaged in housework or sewing, spent most of her time in the society of
one or the other of the merchants’ wives who lived in the flats and
apartments around her own. She kept up the Chinese custom of taking her
meals after her husband or at a separate table, and observed faithfully
the rule laid down for her by her late mother-in-law: to keep a quiet
tongue in the presence of her man. Sankwei, on his part, was always kind
and indulgent. He bought her silk dresses, hair ornaments, fans, and
sweetmeats. He ordered her favorite dishes from the Chinese restaurant.
When she wished to go out with her women friends, he hired a carriage,
and shortly after her advent erected behind her sleeping room a chapel
for the ancestral tablet and gorgeous goddess which she had brought over
seas with her.

Upon the child both parents lavished affection. He was a quaint, serious
little fellow, small for his age and requiring much care. Although
naturally much attached to his mother, he became also very fond of his
father who, more like an elder brother than a parent, delighted in
playing all kinds of games with him, and whom he followed about like a
little dog. Adah Charlton took a great fancy to him and sketched him in
many different poses for a book on Chinese children which she was
illustrating.

“He will be strong enough to go to school next year,” said Sankwei to
her one day. “Later on I intend to put him through an American college.”

“What does your wife think of a Western training for him?” inquired the
young girl.

“I have not consulted her about the matter,” he answered. “A woman does
not understand such things.”

“A woman, Mr. Wou,” declared Adah, “understands such things as well as
and sometimes better than a man.”

“An, American woman, maybe,” amended Sankwei; “but not a Chinese.”

From the first Pau Lin had shown no disposition to become Americanized,
and Sankwei himself had not urged it.

“I do appreciate the advantages of becoming westernized,” said he to
Mrs. Dean whose influence and interest in his studies in America had
helped him to become what he was, “but it is not as if she had come here
as I came, in her learning days. The time for learning with her is
over.”

One evening, upon returning from his store, he found the little Yen
sobbing pitifully.

“What!” he teased, “A man—and weeping.”

The boy tried to hide his face, and as he did so, the father noticed
that his little hand was red and swollen. He strode into the kitchen
where Pau Lin was preparing the evening meal.

“The little child who is not strong—is there anything he could do to
merit the infliction of pain?” he questioned.

Pau Lin faced her husband. “Yes, I think so,” said she.

“What?”

“I forbade him to speak the language of the white women, and he
disobeyed me. He had words in that tongue with the white boy from the
next street.”

Sankwei was astounded.

“We are living in the white man’s country,” said he. “The child will
have to learn the white man’s language.”

“Not my child,” answered Pau Lin.

Sankwei turned away from her. “Come, little one,” said he to his son,
“we will take supper tonight at the restaurant, and afterwards Yen shall
see a show.”

Pau Lin laid down the dish of vegetables which she was straining and
took from a hook as small wrap which she adjusted around the boy.

“Now go with thy father,” said she sternly.

But the boy clung to her—to the hand which had punished him. “I will sup
with you,” he cried, “I will sup with you.”

“Go,” repeated his mother, pushing him from her. And as the two passed
over the threshold, she called to the father: “Keep the wrap around the
child. The night air is chill.”

Late that night, while father and son were peacefully sleeping, the wife
and mother arose, and lifting gently the unconscious boy, bore him into
the next room where she sat down with him in a rocker. Waking, he
clasped his arms around her neck. Backwards and forwards she rocked him,
passionately caressing the wounded hand and crooning and crying until he
fell asleep again.

The first chastisement that the son of Wou Sankwei had received from his
mother, was because he had striven to follow in the footsteps of his
father and use the language of the stranger.

“You did perfectly right,” said old Sien Tau the following morning, as
she leaned over her balcony to speak to the wife of Wou Sankwei. “Had I
again a son to rear, I should see to it that he followed not after the
white people.”

Sien Tau’s son had married a white woman, and his children passed their
grandame on the street without recognition.

“In this country, she is most happy who has no child,” said Lae Choo,
resting her elbow upon the shoulder of Sien Tau. “A Toy, the young
daughter of Lew Wing, is as bold and free in her ways as are the white
women, and her name is on all the men’s tongues. What prudent man of our
race would take her as wife?”

“One needs not to be born here to be made a fool of,” joined in Pau Lin,
appearing at another balcony door. “Think of Hum Wah. From sunrise till
midnight he worked for fourteen years, then a white man came along and
persuaded from him every dollar, promising to return doublefold within
the moon. Many moons have risen and waned, and Hum Wah still waits on
this side of the sea for the white man and his money. Meanwhile, his
father and mother, who looked long for his coming, have passed beyond
returning.”

“The new religion—what trouble it brings!” exclaimed Lae Choo. “My man
received word yestereve that the good old mother of Chee Ping—he who was
baptized a Christian at the last baptizing in the Mission around the
corner—had her head secretly severed from her body by the steadfast
people of the village, as soon as the news reached there. ’Twas the
first violent death in the records of the place. This happened to the
mother of one of the boys attending the Mission corner of my street.”

“No doubt, the poor old mother, having lost face, minded not so much the
losing of her head,” sighed Pau Lin. She gazed below her curiously. The
American Chinatown held a strange fascination for the girl from the
seacoast village. Streaming along the street was a motley throng made up
of all nationalities. The sing-song voices of girls whom respectable
merchants’ wives shudder to name, were calling to one another from high
balconies up shadowy alleys. A fat barber was laughing hilariously at a
drunken white man who had fallen into a gutter; a withered old fellow,
carrying a bird in a cage, stood at the corner entreating passersby to
have a good fortune told; some children were burning punk on the
curbstone. There went by a stalwart Chief of the Six Companies engaged
in earnest confab with a yellow-robed priest from the joss house. A
Chinese dressed in the latest American style and a very blonde woman,
laughing immoderately, were entering a Chinese restaurant together.
Above all the hubbub of voices was heard the clang of electric cars and
the jarring of heavy wheels over cobblestones.

Pau Lin raised her head and looked her thoughts at the old woman, Sien
Tau.

“Yes,” nodded the dame, “’tis a mad place in which to bring up a child.”

Pau Lin went back into the house, gave little Yen his noonday meal, and
dressed him with care. His father was to take him out that afternoon.
She questioned the boy, as she braided his queue, concerning the white
women whom he visited with his father.

It was evening when they returned—Wou Sankwei and his boy. The little
fellow ran up to her in high glee. “See, mother,” said he, pulling off
his cap, “I am like father now. I wear no queue.”

The mother looked down upon him—at the little round head from which the
queue, which had been her pride, no longer dangled.

“Ah!” she cried. “I am ashamed of you; I am ashamed!”

The boy stared at her, hurt and disappointed.

“Never mind, son,” comforted his father. “It is all right.”

Pau Lin placed the bowls of seaweed and chickens’ liver before them and
went back to the kitchen where her own meal was waiting. But she did not
eat. She was saying within herself: “It is for the white woman he has
done this; it is for the white woman!”

Later, as she laid the queue of her son within the trunk wherein lay
that of his father, long since cast aside, she discovered a picture of
Mrs. Dean, taken when the American woman had first become the teacher
and benefactress of the youthful laundryman. She ran over with it to her
husband. “Here,” said she; “it is a picture of one of your white
friends.” Sankwei took it from her almost reverently, “That woman,” he
explained, “has been to me as a mother.”

“And the young woman—the one with eyes the color of blue china—is she
also as a mother?” inquired Pau Lin gently.

But for all her gentleness, Wou Sankwei flushed angrily.

“Never speak of her,” he cried. “Never speak of her!”

“Ha, ha, ha! Ha, ha, ha!” laughed Pau Lin. It was a soft and not
unmelodious laugh, but to Wou Sankwei it sounded almost sacrilegious.

Nevertheless, he soon calmed down. Pau Lin was his wife, and to be kind
to her was not only his duty but his nature. So when his little boy
climbed into his lap and besought his father to pipe him a tune, he
reached for his flute and called to Pau Lin to put aside work for that
night. He would play her some Chinese music. And Pau Lin, whose heart
and mind, undiverted by change, had been concentrated upon Wou Sankwei
ever since the day she had become his wife, smothered, for the time
being, the bitterness in her heart, and succumbed to the magic of her
husband’s playing—a magic which transported her in thought to the old
Chinese days, the old Chinese days whose impression and influence ever
remain with the exiled sons and daughters of China.


                                   IV

That a man should take to himself two wives, or even three, if he
thought proper, seemed natural and right in the eyes of Wou Pau Lin. She
herself had come from a home where there were two broods of children and
where her mother and her father’s other wife had eaten their meals
together as sisters. In that home there had not always been peace; but
each woman, at least, had the satisfaction of knowing that her man did
not regard or treat the other woman as her superior. To each had fallen
the common lot—to bear children to the man, and the man was master of
all.

But, oh! the humiliation and shame of bearing children to a man who
looked up to another woman—and a woman of another race—as a being above
the common uses of women. There is a jealousy of the mind more poignant
than any mere animal jealousy.

When Wou Sankwei’s second child was two weeks old, Adah Charlton and her
aunt called to see the little one, and the young girl chatted brightly
with the father and played merrily with Yen, who was growing strong and
merry. The American women could not, of course, converse with the
Chinese; but Adah placed beside her a bunch of beautiful flowers,
pressed her hand, and looked down upon her with radiant eyes. Secure in
the difference of race, in the love of many friends, and in the
happiness of her chosen work, no suspicion whatever crossed her mind
that the woman whose husband was her aunt’s protégé tasted everything
bitter because of her.

After the visitors had gone, Pau Lin, who had been watching her
husband’s face while the young artist was in the room, said to him:

“She can be happy who takes all and gives nothing.”

“Takes all and gives nothing,” echoed her husband. “What do you mean?”

“She has taken all your heart,” answered Pau Lin, “but she has not given
you a son. It is I who have had that task.”

“You are my wife,” answered Wou Sankwei. “And she—oh! how can you speak
of her so? She, who is as a pure water-flower—a lily!”

He went out of the room, carrying with him a little painting of their
boy, which Adah Charlton had given to him as she bade him goodbye and
which he had intended showing with pride to the mother.

It was on the day that the baby died that Pau Lin first saw the little
picture. It had fallen out of her husband’s coat pocket when he lifted
the tiny form in his arms and declared it lifeless. Even in that first
moment of loss Pau Lin, stooping to pick up the portrait, had shrunk
back in horror, crying: “She would cast a spell! She would cast a
spell!”

She set her heel upon the face of the picture and destroyed it beyond
restoration.

“You know not what you say and do,” sternly rebuked Sankwei. He would
have added more, but the mystery of the dead child’s look forbade him.

“The loss of a son is as the loss of a limb,” said he to his childless
partner, as under the red glare of the lanterns they sat discussing the
sad event.

“But you are not without consolation,” returned Leung Tsao. “Your
firstborn grows in strength and beauty.”

“True,” assented Wou Sankwei, his heavy thoughts becoming lighter.

And Pau Lin, in her curtained balcony overhead, drew closer her child
and passionately cried:

“Sooner would I, O heart of my heart, that the light of thine eyes were
also quenched, than that thou shouldst be contaminated with the wisdom
of the new.”


                                   V

The Chinese women friends of Wou Pau Lin gossiped among themselves, and
their gossip reached the ears of the American woman friend of Pau Lin’s
husband. Since the days of her widowhood Mrs. Dean had devoted herself
earnestly and whole-heartedly to the betterment of the condition and the
uplifting of the young workingmen of Chinese race who came to America.
Their appeal and need, as she had told her niece, was for closer
acquaintance with the knowledge of the Western people, and _that_ she
had undertaken to give them, as far as she was able. The rewards and
satisfactions of her work had been rich in some cases. Witness Wou
Sankwei.

But the gossip had reached and much perturbed her. What was it that they
said Wou Sankwei’s wife had declared—that her little son should not go
to an American school nor learn the American learning. Such bigotry and
narrow-mindedness! How sad to think of! Here was a man who had benefited
and profited by living in America, anxious to have his son receive the
benefits of a Western education—and here was this man’s wife opposing
him with her ignorance and hampering him with her unreasonable jealousy.

Yes, she had heard that too. That Wou Sankwei’s wife was
jealous—jealous—and her husband the most moral of men, the kindest and
the most generous.

“Of what is she jealous?” she questioned Adah Charlton. “Other Chinese
men’s wives, I have known, have had cause to be jealous, for it is true
some of them are dreadfully immoral and openly support two or more
wives. But not Wou Sankwei. And this little Pau Lin. She has everything
that a Chinese woman could wish for.”

A sudden flash of intuition came to the girl, rendering her for a moment
speechless. When she did find words, she said:

“Everything that a Chinese woman could wish for, you say. Auntie, I do
not believe there is any real difference between the feelings of a
Chinese wife and an American wife. Sankwei is treating Pau Lin as he
would treat her were he living in China. Yet it cannot be the same to
her as if she were in their own country, where he would not come in
contact with American women. A woman is a woman with intuitions and
perceptions, whether Chinese or American, whether educated or
uneducated, and Sankwei’s wife must have noticed, even on the day of her
arrival, her husband’s manner towards us, and contrasted it with his
manner towards her. I did not realize this before you told me that she
was jealous. I only wish I had. Now, for all her ignorance, I can see
that the poor little thing became more of an American in that one half
hour on the steamer than Wou Sankwei, for all your pride in him, has
become in seven years.”

Mrs. Dean rested her head on her hand. She was evidently much perplexed.

“What you say may be, Adah,” she replied after a while; “but even so, it
is Sankwei whom I have known so long, who has my sympathies. He has much
to put up with. They have drifted seven years of life apart. There is no
bond of interest or sympathy between them, save the boy. Yet never the
slightest hint of trouble has come to me from his own lips. Before the
coming of Pau Lin, he would confide in me every little thing that
worried him, as if he were my own son. Now he maintains absolute silence
as to his private affairs.”

“Chinese principles,” observed Adah, resuming her work. “Yes, I admit
Sankwei has some puzzles to solve. Naturally, when he tries to live two
lives—that of a Chinese and that of an American.”

“He is compelled to that,” retorted Mrs. Dean. “Is it not what we teach
these Chinese boys—to become Americans? And yet, they are Chinese, and
must, in a sense, remain so.”

Adah did not answer.

Mrs. Dean sighed. “Poor, dear children, both of them,” mused she. “I
feel very low-spirited over the matter. I suppose you wouldn’t care to
come down town with me. I should like to have another chat with Mrs.
Wing Sing.”

“I shall be glad of the change,” replied Adah, laying down her brushes.

Rows of lanterns suspended from many balconies shed a mellow, moonshiny
radiance. On the walls and doors were splashes of red paper inscribed
with hieroglyphics. In the narrow streets, booths decorated with
flowers, and banners and screens painted with immense figures of josses
diverted the eye; while bands of musicians in gaudy silks, shrilled and
banged, piped and fluted.

Everybody seemed to be out of doors—men, women, and children—and nearly
all were in holiday attire. A couple of priests, in vivid scarlet and
yellow robes, were kotowing before an altar covered with a rich cloth,
embroidered in white and silver. Some Chinese students from the
University of California stood looking on with comprehending,
half-scornful interest; three girls lavishly dressed in colored silks,
with their black hair plastered back from their faces and heavily
bejewelled behind, chirped and chattered in a gilded balcony above them
like birds in a cage. Little children, their hands full of
half-moon-shaped cakes, were pattering about, with eyes, for all the
hour, as bright as stars.

Chinatown was celebrating the Harvest Moon Festival, and Adah Charlton
was glad that she had an opportunity to see something of the celebration
before she returned East. Mrs. Dean, familiar with the Chinese people
and the mazes of Chinatown, led her around fearlessly, pointing out this
and that object of interest and explaining to her its meaning. Seeing
that it was a gala night, she had abandoned her idea of calling upon the
Chinese friend.

Just as they turned a corner leading up to the street where Wou
Sankwei’s place of business and residence was situated, a pair of little
hands grasped Mrs. Dean’s skirt and a delighted little voice piped: “See
me! See me!” It was little Yen, resplendent in mauve-colored pantaloons
and embroidered vest and cap. Behind him was a tall man whom both women
recognized.

“How do you happen to have Yen with you?” Adah asked.

“His father handed him over to me as a sort of guide, counsellor, and
friend. The little fellow is very amusing.”

“See over here,” interrupted Yen. He hopped over the alley to where the
priests stood by the altar. The grown people followed him.

“What is that man chanting?” asked Adah. One of the priests had mounted
a table, and with arms outstretched towards the moon sailing high in the
heavens, seemed to be making some sort of an invocation.

Her friend listened for some moments before replying:

“It is a sort of apotheosis of the moon. I have heard it on a like
occasion in Hankow, and the Chinese _bonze_ who officiated gave me a
translation. I almost know it by heart. May I repeat it to you?”

Mrs. Dean and Yen were examining the screen with the big josses.

“Yes, I should like to hear it,” said Adah.

“Then fix your eyes upon Diana.”

“Dear and lovely moon, as I watch thee pursuing thy solitary course o’er
the silent heavens, heart-easing thoughts steal o’er me and calm my
passionate soul. Thou art so sweet, so serious, so serene, that thou
causest me to forget the stormy emotions which crash like jarring
discords across the harmony of life, and bringest to my memory a voice
scarce ever heard amidst the warring of the world—love’s low voice.

“Thou art so peaceful and so pure that it seemeth as if naught false or
ignoble could dwell beneath thy gentle radiance, and that
earnestness—even the earnestness of genius—must glow within the bosom of
him on whose head thy beams fall like blessings.

“The magic of thy sympathy disburtheneth me of many sorrows, and
thoughts, which, like the songs of the sweetest sylvan singer, are too
dear and sacred for the careless ears of day, gush forth with
unconscious eloquence when thou art the only listener.

“Dear and lovely moon, there are some who say that those who dwell in
the sunlit fields of reason should fear to wander through the moonlit
valleys of imagination; but I, who have ever been a pilgrim and a
stranger in the realm of the wise, offer to thee the homage of a heart
which appreciates that thou graciously shinest—even on the fool.”

“Is that really Chinese?” queried Adah.

“No doubt about it—in the main. Of course, I cannot swear to it word for
word.”

“I should think that there would be some reference to the fruits of the
earth—the harvest. I always understood that the Chinese religion was so
practical.”

“Confucianism is. But the Chinese mind requires two religions. Even the
most commonplace Chinese has yearnings for something above everyday
life. Therefore, he combines with his Confucianism, Buddhism—or, in this
country, Christianity.”

“Thank you for the information. It has given me a key to the mind of a
certain Chinese in whom Auntie and I are interested.”

“And who is this particular Chinese in whom you are interested.”

“The father of the little boy who is with us tonight.”

“Wou Sankwei! Why, here he comes with Lee Tong Hay. Are you acquainted
with Lee Tong Hay?”

“No, but I believe Aunt is. Plays and sings in vaudeville, doesn’t he?”

“Yes; he can turn himself into a German, a Scotchman, an Irishman, or an
American, with the greatest ease, and is as natural in each character as
he is as a Chinaman. Hello, Lee Tong Hay.”

“Hello, Mr. Stimson.”

While her friend was talking to the lively young Chinese who had
answered his greeting, Adah went over to where Wou Sankwei stood
speaking to Mrs. Dean.

“Yen begins school next week,” said her aunt, drawing her arm within her
own. It was time to go home.

Adah made no reply. She was settling her mind to do something quite out
of the ordinary. Her aunt often called her romantic and impractical.
Perhaps she was.


                                   VI

“Auntie went out of town this morning,” said Adah Charlton. “I, ’phoned
for you to come up, Sankwei because I wished to have a personal and
private talk with you.”

“Any trouble, Miss Adah,” inquired the young merchant. “Anything I can
do for you?”

Mrs. Dean often called upon him to transact little business matters for
her or to consult with him on various phases of her social and family
life.

“I don’t know what I would do without Sankwei’s head to manage for me,”
she often said to her niece.

“No,” replied the girl, “you do too much for us. You always have, ever
since I’ve known you. It’s a shame for us to have allowed you.”

“What are you talking about, Miss Adah? Since I came to America your
aunt has made this house like a home to me, and, of course, I take an
interest in it and like to do anything for it that a man can. I am
always happy when I come here.”

“Yes, I know you are, poor old boy,” said Adah to herself.

Aloud she said: “I have something to say to you which I would like you
to hear. Will you listen, Sankwei?”

“Of course I will,” he answered.

“Well then,” went on Adah, “I asked you to come here today because I
have heard that there is trouble at your house and that your wife is
jealous of you.”

“Would you please not talk about that, Miss Adah. It is a matter which
you cannot understand.”

“You promised to listen and heed. I do understand, even though I cannot
speak to your wife nor find out what she feels and thinks. I know you,
Sankwei, and I can see just how the trouble has arisen. As soon as I
heard that your wife was jealous I knew why she was jealous.”

“Why?” he queried.

“Because,” she answered unflinchingly, “you are thinking far too much of
other women.”

“Too much of other women?” echoed Sankwei dazedly. “I did not know
that.”

“No, you didn’t. That is why I am telling you. But you are, Sankwei. And
you are becoming too Americanized. My aunt encourages you to become so,
and she is a good woman, with the best and highest of motives; but we
are all liable to make mistakes, and it is a mistake to try and make a
Chinese man into an American—if he has a wife who is to remain as she
always has been. It would be different if you were not married and were
a man free to advance. But you are not.”

“What am I to do then, Miss Adah? You say that I think too much of other
women besides her, and that I am too much Americanized. What can I do
about it now that it is so?”

“First of all you must think of your wife. She has done for you what no
American woman would do—came to you to be your wife, love you and serve
you without even knowing you—took you on trust altogether. You must
remember that for many years she was chained in a little cottage to care
for your ailing and aged mother—a hard task indeed for a young girl. You
must remember that you are the only man in the world to her, and that
you have always been the only one that she has ever cared for. Think of
her during all the years you are here, living a lonely hard-working
life—a baby and an old woman her only companions. For this, she had left
all her own relations. No American woman would have sacrificed herself
so.

“And, now, what has she? Only you and her housework. The white woman
reads, plays, paints, attends concerts, entertainments, lectures,
absorbs herself in the work she likes, and in the course of her life
thinks of and cares for a great many people. She has much to make her
happy besides her husband. The Chinese woman has him only.”

“And her boy.”

“Yes, her boy,” repeated Adah Charlton, smiling in spite of herself, but
lapsing into seriousness the moment after. “There’s another reason for
you to drop the American for a time and go back to being a Chinese. For
sake of your darling little boy, you and your wife should live together
kindly and cheerfully. That is much more important for his welfare than
that he should go to the American school and become Americanized.”

“It is my ambition to put him through both American and Chinese
schools.”

“But what he needs most of all is a loving mother.”

“She loves him all right.”

“Then why do you not love her as you should? If I were married I would
not think my husband loved me very much if he preferred spending his
evenings in the society of other women than in mine, and was so much
more polite and deferential to other women than he was to me. Can’t you
understand now why your wife is jealous?”

Wou Sankwei stood up.

“Goodbye,” said Adah Charlton, giving him her hand.

“Goodbye,” said Wou Sankwei.

Had he been a white man, there is no doubt that Adah Charlton’s little
lecture would have had a contrary effect from what she meant it to have.
At least, the lectured would have been somewhat cynical as to her
sincerity. But Wou Sankwei was not a white man. He was a Chinese, and
did not see any reason for insincerity in a matter as important as that
which Adah Charlton had brought before him. He felt himself exiled from
Paradise, yet it did not occur to him to question, as a white man would
have done, whether the angel with the flaming sword had authority for
her action. Neither did he lay the blame for things gone wrong upon any
woman. He simply made up his mind to make the best of what was.


                                  VII

It had been a peaceful week in the Wou household—the week before little
Yen was to enter the American school. So peaceful indeed that Wou
Sankwei had begun to think that his wife was reconciled to his wishes
with regard to the boy. He whistled softly as he whittled away at a
little ship he was making for him. Adah Charlton’s suggestions had set
coursing a train of thought which had curved around Pau Lin so closely
that he had decided that, should she offer any further opposition to the
boy’s attending the American school, he would not insist upon it. After
all, though the American language might be useful during this century,
the wheel of the world would turn again, and then it might not be
necessary at all. Who could tell? He came very near to expressing
himself thus to Pau Lin.

And now it was the evening before the morning that little Yen was to
march away to the American school. He had been excited all day over the
prospect, and to calm him, his father finally told him to read aloud a
little story from the Chinese book which he had given him on his first
birthday in America and which he had taught him to read. Obediently the
little fellow drew his stool to his mother’s side and read in his
childish sing-song the story of an irreverent lad who came to great
grief because he followed after the funeral of his grandfather and
regaled himself on the crisply roasted chickens and loose-skinned
oranges which were left on the grave for the feasting of the spirit.

Wou Sankwei laughed heartily over the story. It reminded him of some of
his own boyish escapades. But Pau Lin stroked silently the head of the
little reader, and seemed lost in reverie.

A whiff of fresh salt air blew in from the Bay. The mother shivered, and
Wou Sankwei, looking up from the fastening of the boat’s rigging, bade
Yen close the door. As the little fellow came back to his mother’s side,
he stumbled over her knee.

“Oh, poor mother!” he exclaimed with quaint apology. “’Twas the stupid
feet, not Yen.”

“So,” she replied, curling her arm around his neck, “’tis always the
feet. They are to the spirit as the cocoon to the butterfly. Listen, and
I will sing you the song of the Happy Butterfly.”

She began singing the old Chinese ditty in a fresh birdlike voice. Wou
Sankwei, listening, was glad to hear her. He liked having everyone
around him cheerful and happy. That had been the charm of the Dean
household.

The ship was finished before the little family retired. Yen examined it,
critically at first, then exultingly. Finally, he carried it away and
placed it carefully in the closet where he kept his kites, balls, tops,
and other treasures. “We will set sail with it tomorrow after school,”
said he to his father, hugging gratefully that father’s arm.

Sankwei rubbed the little round head. The boy and he were great chums.

                  *       *       *       *       *

What was that sound which caused Sankwei to start from his sleep? It was
just on the border land of night and day, an unusual time for Pau Lin to
be up. Yet, he could hear her voice in Yen’s room. He raised himself on
his elbow and listened. She was softly singing a nursery song about some
little squirrels and a huntsman. Sankwei wondered at her singing in that
way at such an hour. From where he lay he could just perceive the
child’s cot and the silent child figure lying motionless in the dim
light. How very motionless! In a moment Sankwei was beside it.

The empty cup with its dark dregs told the tale.

The thing he loved the best in all the world—the darling son who had
crept into his heart with his joyousness and beauty—had been taken from
him—by her who had given.

Sankwei reeled against the wall. The kneeling figure by the cot arose.
The face of her was solemn and tender.

“He is saved,” smiled she, “from the Wisdom of the New.”

In grief too bitter for words the father bowed his head upon his hands.

“Why! Why!” queried Pau Lin, gazing upon him bewilderedly. “The child is
happy. The butterfly mourns not o’er the shed cocoon.”

Sankwei put up his shutters and wrote this note to Adah Charlton:

  I have lost my boy through an accident. I am returning to China with
  my wife whose health requires a change.




                          “ITS WAVERING IMAGE”


                                   I

Pan was a half white, half Chinese girl. Her mother was dead, and Pan
lived with her father who kept an Oriental Bazaar on Dupont Street. All
her life had Pan lived in Chinatown, and if she were different in any
sense from those around her, she gave little thought to it. It was only
after the coming of Mark Carson that the mystery of her nature began to
trouble her.

They met at the time of the boycott of the Sam Yups by the See Yups.
After the heat and dust and unsavoriness of the highways and byways of
Chinatown, the young reporter who had been sent to find a story, had
stepped across the threshold of a cool, deep room, fragrant with the
odor of dried lilies and sandalwood, and found Pan.

She did not speak to him, nor he to her. His business was with the
spectacled merchant, who, with a pointed brush, was making up accounts
in brown paper books and rolling balls in an abacus box. As to Pan, she
always turned from whites. With her father’s people she was natural and
at home; but in the presence of her mother’s she felt strange and
constrained, shrinking from their curious scrutiny as she would from the
sharp edge of a sword.

When Mark Carson returned to the office, he asked some questions
concerning the girl who had puzzled him. What was she? Chinese or white?
The city editor answered him, adding: “She is an unusually bright girl,
and could tell more stories about the Chinese than any other person in
this city—if she would.”

Mark Carson had a determined chin, clever eyes, and a tone to his voice
which easily won for him the confidence of the unwary. In the reporter’s
room he was spoken of as “a man who would sell his soul for a story.”





                                