        DAUGHTER

                          A Sequel to MOTHER

                         By PHILIP JOSÉ FARMER

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                 Thrilling Wonder Stories Winter 1954.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


_CQ! CQ!_

This is Mother Hardhead pulsing.

Keep quiet, all you virgins and Mothers, while I communicate. Listen,
listen, all you who are hooked into this broadcast. Listen, and I
will tell you how I left my Mother, how my two sisters and I grew
our shells, how I dealt with the olfway, and why I have become the
Mother with the most prestige, the strongest shell, the most powerful
broadcaster and beamer, and the pulser of a new language.

First, before I tell my story, I will reveal to all you who do not know
it that my father was a mobile.

Yes, do not be nervequivered. That is a so-story. It is not a
not-so-story.

Father was a mobile.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mother pulsed, "Get out!"

Then, to show she meant business, she opened her exit-iris.

That sobered us up and made us realize how serious she was. Before,
when she snapped open her iris, she did it so we could practise pulsing
at the other young crouched in the doorway to their Mother's wombs,
or else send a respectful message to the Mothers themselves, or even
a quick one to Grandmother, far away on a mountainside. Not that she
received, I think, because we young were too weak to transmit that far.
Anyway, Grandmother never acknowledged receipt.

At times, when Mother was annoyed because we would all broadcast at
once instead of asking her permission to speak one at a time or because
we would crawl up the sides of her womb and then drop off the ceiling
onto the floor with a thud, she would pulse at us to get out and build
our own shells. She meant it, she said.

Then, according to our mood, we would either settle down or else get
more boisterous. Mother would reach out with her tentacles and hold us
down and spank us. If that did no good, she would threaten us with the
olfway. That did the trick. That is until she used him too many times.
After a while, we got so we didn't believe there was an olfway. Mother,
we thought, was creating a not-so-story. We should have known better,
however, for Mother loathed not-so-stories.

Another thing that quivered her nerves was our conversation with Father
in Orsemay. Although he had taught her his language, he refused to
teach her Orsemay. When he wanted to send messages to us that he knew
she wouldn't approve, he would pulse at us in our private language.
That was another thing, I think, that finally made Mother so angry she
cast us out despite Father's pleadings that we be allowed to remain
four more seasons.

You must understand that we virgins had remained in the womb far longer
than we should have. The cause for our overstay was Father.

He was the mobile.

Yes, I know what you're going to reply. All fathers, you will repeat,
are mobiles.

But he was father. He was the _pulsing_ mobile.

Yes, he could, too. He could pulse with the best of us. Or maybe he
_himself_ couldn't. Not directly. We pulse with organs in our
body. But Father, if I understand him correctly, used a creature of
some kind which was separate from his body. Or maybe it was an organ
that wasn't attached to him.

Anyway, he had no internal organs or pulse-stalks growing from him to
pulse with. He used this creature, this r-a-d-i-o, as he called it. And
it worked just fine.

When he conversed with Mother, he did so in Motherpulse or in his
own language, mobile-pulse. With us he used Orsemay. That's like
mobile-pulse, only a little different. Mother never did figure out the
difference.

When I finish my story, dearie, I'll teach you Orsemay. I've been
beamed that you've enough prestige to join our Highest Hill sorority
and thus learn our secret communication.

Mother declared Father had two means of pulsing. Besides his radio,
which he used to communicate with us, he could pulse in another and
totally different manner. He didn't use dotdeet-ditdashes, either. His
pulses needed air to carry them, and he sent them with the same organ
he ate with. Boils one's stomach to think of it, doesn't it?

Father was caught while passing by my Mother. She didn't know what
mating-lust perfume to send downwind towards him so he would be
lured within reach of her tentacles. She had never smelled a mobile
like him before. But he did have an odor that was similar to that of
another kind of mobile, so she wafted that towards him. It seemed
to work, because he came close enough for her to seize him with her
extra-uterine tentacles and pop him into her shell.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later, after I was born, Father radioed me--in Orsemay, of course,
so Mother wouldn't understand--that he had smelled the perfume and
that it, among other things, had attracted him. But the odor had been
that of a hairy tree-climbing mobile, and he had wondered what such
creatures were doing on a bare hill-top. When he learned to converse
with Mother, he was surprised that she had identified him with that
mobile.

Ah, well, he pulsed, it is not the first time a female has made a
monkey of a man.

He also informed me that he had thought Mother was just an enormous
boulder on top of the hill. Not until a section of the supposed rock
opened out was he aware of anything out of the ordinary or that the
boulder was her shell and held her body within. Mother, he radioed,
is something like a dinosaur-sized snail, or jellyfish, equipped with
organs that generate radar and radio waves and with an egg-shaped
chamber big as the living room of a bungalow, a womb in which she bears
and raises her young.

I didn't understand more than half of these terms of course. Nor was
Father able to explain them satisfactorily.

He did make me promise not to pulse Mother that he had thought she was
just a big lump of mineral. Why, I don't know.

Father puzzled Mother. Though he fought her when she dragged him in,
he had no claws or teeth sharp enough to tear her conception-spot.
Mother tried to provoke him further, but he refused to react. When
she realized that he was a pulse-sending mobile, and released him to
study him, he wandered around the womb. After a while he caught on to
the fact that Mother was beaming from her womb pulse-stalk. He learned
how to talk with her by using his detachable organ, which he termed
a panrad. Eventually, he taught her his language, mobile-pulse. When
Mother learned that and informed other Mothers about that, her prestige
became the highest in all the area. No Mother had ever thought of a new
language. The idea stunned them.

Father said he was the only communicating mobile on this world. His
s-p-a-c-e-s-h-i-p had crashed, and he would now remain forever with
Mother.

Father learned the dinnerpulses when Mother summoned her young playing
about her womb. He radioed the proper message. Mother's nerves were
quivered by the idea that he was semantic, but she opened her stew-iris
and let him eat. Then Father held up fruit or other objects and let
Mother beam at him with her wombstalk what the proper dotdit-deetdashes
were for each. Then he would repeat on his panrad the name of the
object to verify it.

Mother's sense of smell helped her, of course. Sometimes, it is hard to
tell the difference between an apple and a peach just by pulsing it.
Odors aid you.

She caught on fast. Father told her she was very intelligent--for a
female. That quivered her nerves. She wouldn't pulse with him for
several mealperiods after that.

       *       *       *       *       *

One thing that Mother especially liked about Father was that when
conception-time came, she could direct him what to do. She didn't have
to depend on luring a non-semantic mobile into her shell with perfumes
and then hold it to her conception-spot while it scratched and bit the
spot in its efforts to fight its way from the grip of her tentacles.
Father had no claws, but he carried a detachable claw. He named it an
s-c-a-l-p-e-l.

When I asked him why he had so many detachable organs, he replied that
he was a man of parts.

Father was always talking nonsense.

But he had trouble understanding Mother, too.

Her reproductive processes amazed him.

"By G-o-d," he beamed, "who'd believe it? That a healing process in a
wound would result in conception? Just the opposite of cancer."

When we were adolescents and about ready to be shoved out of Mother's
shell, we received Mother asking Father to mangle her spot again.
Father replied no. He wanted to wait another four seasons. He had said
farewell to two broods of his young, and he wanted to keep us around
longer so he could give us a real education and enjoy us instead of
starting to raise another group of virgins.

This refusal quivered Mother's nerves and upset her stew-stomach so
that our food was sour for several meals. But she didn't act against
him. He gave her too much prestige. All the Mothers were dropping
Motherpulse and learning mobile from Mother as fast as she could teach
it.

I asked, "What's prestige?"

"When you send, the others have to receive. And they don't dare pulse
back until you're through and you give your permission."

"Oh, I'd like prestige!"

Father interrupted, "Little Hardhead, if you want to get ahead, you
tune in to me. I'll tell you a few things even your Mother can't. After
all, I'm a mobile, and I've been around."

And he would outline what I had to expect once I left him and Mother
and how, if I used my brain, I could survive and eventually get more
prestige than even Grandmother had.

Why he called me Hardhead, I don't know. I was still a virgin and
had not, of course, grown a shell. I was as soft-bodied as any of
my sisters. But he told me he was f-o-n-d of me because I was so
hard-headed. I accepted the statement without trying to grasp it.

Anyway, we got eight extra seasons in Mother because Father wanted it
that way. We might have gotten some more, but when winter came again,
Mother insisted Father mangle her spot. He replied he wasn't ready. He
was just beginning to get acquainted with his children--he called us
Sluggos--and, after we left, he'd have nobody but Mother to talk to
until the next brood grew up.


